### Bletchley Park
Bletchley Park was the home of the British Codebreakers during World War II, and was run by the Government Code and Cypher School (GC&CS). The park is located in Buckinghamshire, England. The advantage of the parks location was its centrality. It was just in the middle of the Oxford and Cambridge universities who supplied many code-breakers. Bletchley Park is famous for cracking naval Enigma and Lorenz codes. Although many incredible minds worked together to decode messages at Bletchley, the most famous codebreaker remains Alan Turing. In 1945 Bletchley Park had about 10‘000 code-breakers at their service, 75% of them were women, due to the lack of men, who had been sent to war. The extreme secrecy around Bletchley Park meant that many of the achievements were not revealed until decades later. All staff members had to sign the Official Secrets Act to ensure their loyalty. They were told not to talk about Britain’s “Ultra secret” or any of the intelligence acquired by decrypting enemy messages and signals. Members were not even allowed to share this information with their relatives or discuss it at Bletchley Park. This discretion was partially respected, since Germany had no idea about Britain’s success, even though we know today, that Bletchley Park had been infiltrated by a Soviet spy that leaked information about the “Ultra secret”. Today, Bletchley Park is a famous tourist attraction.

_Why is it important that Codebreaking agencies are hidden and operated in secret?_
**Solution**: If enemies would find out about a Codebreaking agency, they would send spies/upgrade their encryption methods/send fake messages/sabotage etc.
