### Rome

One of the earliest known and simplest ciphers, the Caesar cipher, is a shift cipher, which means it encrypts by shifting all the letters in a piece of text by a certain number of places. It was named after Julius Caesar, who used it to encrypt messages sent to his generals. Caesar ciphers are very simple to create, but are also very easy to crack. The key for this cipher is a letter which represents the number of shifts in the alphabet. So for example, a key of E means "shift 4 places". The key Z can either mean "shift 25 places" or "shift one place backwards".

#### Example

The word "HELP" with the key J becomes "ROVZ".

~~~~
ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
KLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZABCDEFGHIJ
~~~~

Caesar’s method is a weak encryption method, since there are only 26 possibilities. The Enigma machine used in World War II by the German military had over 158 quintillion combinations! To crack the Caesar cipher we can also use a method called frequency analysis. This is where the number of times each letter occurs is analysed. The frequency of the most commonly occurring letters in the cipher text correspond to the most common in the plaintext (etaoin shrdlu).

#### Example

The following cipher text is given:

~~~~
RYYVBGWHFGNGRPU
~~~~

After analysing the text we get:
| Letter | Percentage | Number of occurrences |
|--------|------------|-----------------------|
| N      | 6.67%      | 1                     |   
| P      | 6.67%      | 1                     |   
| U      | 6.67%      | 1                     |   
| F      | 6.67%      | 1                     |   
| W      | 6.67%      | 1                     |   
| V      | 6.67%      | 1                     |   
| B      | 6.67%      | 1                     |   
| H      | 6.67%      | 1                     |   
| R      | 13.33%     | 2                     |   
| Y      | 13.33%     | 2                     |   
| G      | 20.0%      | 3                     |  

Now we compare the most common letters from the cipher text with the most common English letters: etaoin shrdlu

~~~~
If cipher text `G` is plaintext `E`, then the shift is `2`.
Result: pwwtzeufdelepns
Else if cipher text `G` is plaintext `T`, then the shift is `13`.
Result: elliotjustatech
~~~~

It is believed that Julius Caesar used a key of E when encrypting messages. Try to decrypt
this message Caesar sent to one of his generals.

**M leh vexliv fi jmvwx mr e zmppeki xler wigsrh ex Vsqi.**

**Solution**: *I had rather be first in a village than second at Rome.*
